# Status
Rejected

# Title
Designing for Extremes Benefits Everyone

# Abstract
When we think of accessibility, we might think of a small percentage of users with very specific needs. Designing for access, however, has the potential to benefit the majority of your users in profound ways. For example, the typewriter and email were invented as ways for blind and/or hard-of-hearing people to communicate. These inventions gained widespread adoption because they addressed needs most people didn't know they had. In this talk, I'll share strategies for finding these high-impact opportunities.

# Private Abstract
Top-level talk outline; main idea/topics your talk will cover. Only available for organizers and reviewers.
Section 1: Examples of accessible design that improved everyone's lives
I'll quickly explain the history of typewriters, telephones, email, and other historical technologies that have gained widespread adoption. I'll also talk about some modern-day examples, including the idea of redesigning apps for performance. Many companies with an international audience are considering users with 2G internet when they put resources into performance - this has the wonderful side benefit of making all users happy because products load faster in general.

My theme in this section will be that most people have lighter versions of the problems that people with disabilities have. Most people have the privilege or ability to work around these problems, however, which is a big reason why they don't receive enough attention.

Section 2: How do I find the right problems to solve?
I'll cover these lessons:
- Talk to real users and consider a variety of factors: socioeconomic status, family/dependency status, ability, gender, race, geography, language, sexual orientation, gender identity. It's worth the cost to find a variety of people to discuss your product.
- Think of the person who would have the hardest time using your product. Is it hard to read the text? Does it support each mobile OS's accessibility features? Do you assume a level of familiarity with electronics (e.g., familiarity with long-tapping, app switching, zooming in). Do you make assumptions about the user that aren't necessary (e.g., binary gender, western names)?
- Do you support multiple browsers, including Internet Explorer? Consider the person whose only way of accessing your product is through a 10 year old computer at the local library.
- If you can't come up with anything, start with performance. Speed is a universal requirement because everyone depends on internet.

Section 3: How do I convince people that this is the problem to prioritize?
Even if you're convinced that the problem you're seeing has a viable solution, your teammates might want to prioritize more obvious features that have a clear impact on your bottom line. I'll talk about ways of framing your work in more compelling ways, such as talking about financial benefits and impact on metrics.

# Talk History
I will also submit a condensed version of this idea to !!Con, where talks are only 10 minutes long. It has not been given before.

# T-shirt
Female L

# Which book are you reading currently/have you recently read?
Reading currently: "A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy" and "UX Strategy"

In the past few months: "Grit", "The Charisma Myth", "The Secret Lives of Dresses"

Lately, I've been reading a lot of nonfiction in the "personal development" category and I'd like to mix in more fiction.

# When and how did you start programming?
In my freshman year of college, I was planning to study bioengineering and eventually do something related to medicine. I was told that computer science and programming were important to the future of medical research, so I took my school's introductory CS class out of curiosity. By the end of my freshman year, I was hooked and went on from there.

# What does programming mean for you?
Programming means creating something that you couldn't have done yourself. It means that your ideas have a way of being realized with minimal resources (relative to other fields, such as hardware or scientific research). It means finding a universe where you define the rules.

# Please tell us something surprising or amusing that you have learnt recently
I was talking to some friends who work on Blockly, the educational programming language. I learned that the Blockly team designs for older versions of Internet Explorer, does not use ES6, and tests on a multitude of old Android devices. They have a series of principles for their work because they want children with slow internet, old devices, and/or library computers to be able to learn programming. I was touched by their thoughtfulness and level of rigor.

