# Status
Rejected

# Title
Designing for Extremes Benefits Everyone!

# Abstract
When we think of accessibility, we might think of a small percentage of users with very specific needs. Designing for access, however, has the potential to benefit the majority of your users in profound ways. For example, the typewriter and email were invented as ways for blind and/or hard-of-hearing people to communicate! These inventions gained widespread adoption because they addressed needs most people didn't know they had. In this talk, I'll share reasons why designing for the minority of users is an incredible thing to do and strategies for finding the right features to develop.

# Timeline
(3 minutes) Examples of accessible design that improved everyone's lives
I'll quickly explain the history of typewriters, telephones, email, and other historical technologies that have gained widespread adoption. I'll also talk about some modern-day examples, including the idea of redesigning apps for performance. Many companies with an international audience are considering users with 2G internet when they put resources into performance - this has the wonderful side benefit of making all users happy because products load faster in general.

My theme in this section will be that most people have lighter versions of the problems that people with disabilities have. Most people have the privilege or ability to work around these problems, however, which is a big reason why they don't receive enough attention.

(2 minutes) I still don't really care about accessibility, why should I care?
I want to hammer in the point that designing for accessibility and inclusion is a really huge, emotional deal for your users who are typically marginalized. It can be a huge psychological help to them to see that a product was designed with them in mind. I'm going to repeat a few times in different ways that your majority users will also benefit from features designed for minority users. And, even if they don't benefit, it's most likely that they won't notice or be negatively impacted. This section will blend with the previous section, but serves as a segue into the next one.

(5 minutes) How do I find the right problems to solve?
I'll cover these bullet points (more or less, depending on timing/practice):
- Talk to real users and consider a variety of factors: socioeconomic status, family/dependency status, ability, gender, race, geography, language, sexual orientation, gender identity. It's worth the cost to find a variety of people to talk to about your product.
- Think of the person who would have the hardest time using your product. Is it hard to read the text? Does it support each mobile OS's accessibility features? Do you assume a level of familiarity with electronics (e.g., familiarity with long-tapping, app switching, zooming in). Do you make assumptions about the user that aren't necessary (e.g., binary gender, western names)?
- Do you support multiple browsers, including Internet Explorer? Consider the person whose only way of accessing your product is through a 10 year old computer at the local library.
- If you can't come up with anything, start with performance. Speed is a universal requirement because everyone depends on internet.

# Intended audience
People who design and/or develop consumer-facing products. I want to spark the idea in people's minds that it's within their power to implement features that have an outsized impact on minority users and a decent amount of impact on the majority of users. I hope that by giving many different examples and reasons for why accessible/inclusive design can be beneficial to the company, I give people the tools to justify accessibility work to their teams.

