# Status
Rejected

# Title
DIY Network Tracing When All You Have is Python

# Description
_(brief overview for marketing purposes, max. length 400 characters—about 65 words)_

We started out with a common question: Where is our backend spending its time and where we could make it faster? We knew it would take months to get an open source tool like Zipkin into our system, so we instead used our understanding of networking and Python to find a solution that met most of our needs with a fraction of the development time.

# Topics
_(Please choose the one topic most relevant to your proposal)_

* Systems Engineering
* Orchestration, Scheduling & Containers
* Databases & Distributed Data
* **Networking, Traffic & Edge Management**
* Hardware, Storage & Datacenters
* Capacity Planning
* Technical Leadership

# Secondary topics
_(Please choose up to 2 secondary topics most relevant to your proposal)_
* Automation
* Cloud
* Containerization
* Continuous Delivery
* Databases
* Deployment
* **DevOps**
* Distributed Data & Systems
* Enterprise
* **Networking**
* Orchestration and Scheduling
* Organizational optimization
* Security
* Serverless computing

# Session Type
40 minutes

# Abstract*
_(Longer, more detailed description (3-6 paragraph, bullet points welcome) of your presentation to help the program committee understand what you will cover. Please keep in mind that if your proposal is chosen, this abstract will also appear on the website to help conference attendees decide if it's right for them. Note that our copywriters may edit it for consistency and O’Reilly voice.)_

In monitoring, we start with a simple question, "What's going on in my system?", and quickly get overwhelmed by an avalanche of open source libraries and SaaS vendors promising to answer all of our questions in neat packages. We want the answers, but we feel paralyzed by the complexity of setting up instrumentation, the uncertainty of investing months of time without guaranteed benefit, and the fear that generic tools might not fit our specific situations.

In this talk, I'll share my first experience writing production-quality Python as a new software engineer to solve a problem we had been stuck on for years. We wanted to know where our backend was spending its time and where we could make it faster. We knew it would take months to get an open source tool like Zipkin to work in our system, so we instead used our understanding of networking and Python to find a solution that met most of our needs with a fraction of the development time. With a little monkey patching and a big DIY attitude, we'll learn to feel empowered to tackle problems with Python on our side.

# Who is this presentation for?*
_(Job titles/functions and/or experience, for instance)_

Software engineers starting out in infrastructure or SRE roles or interested in learning more about what kind of coding projects exist in SRE. People who work in monitoring/observability at early/mid-stage startups who want to learn ways to do tracing without huge development cost.

# Audience Level
Beginner

# What's the takeaway for the audience? *
_Main ideas and/or skills attendees will learn from your presentation_

I'll be discussing a realistic problem that engineers could go home and implement in their own systems, so I expect devops/SRE folks to learn some practical skills from this talk. However, I believe the technical details are tangential to a broader lesson about being empowered with the understanding that we can get a great deal of insight from just a little bit of Python. If I had to pick a Pixar movie to represent my talk's lesson, it would be Ratatouille: Anyone can do systems. You learn about cooking in Ratatouille, but it's not the main point. I plan to get this message across explicitly, but also implicitly by sharing my background as a new grad with little networking experience prior to starting this project.

# Prerequisite knowledge for this presentation*
_This information is crucial for attendees. Please describe what skills and knowledge attendees need to have in order to get the most from your talk._

Understanding of Python syntax, including classes and decorators.

# Is this session more conceptual or how-to? *
How-to

# Tutorial hardware and/or installation requirements for attendees 
_If you are submitting a proposal for a 3-hour tutorial, what materials or downloads will attendees need in advance of your tutorial (e.g., a GitHub account, most current version of MySQL, a laptop, etc.)?_

# Please let us know if you have any special equipment needs for your presentation. 
_(Please note: Each presentation room will have a podium, head table, 16:9 screen, projector, microphone, ethernet connection, and wifi.)_

# Video URL 
_While not compulsory, we strongly encourage you to provide at least one video clip of the speaker. If you don’t have video of the speaker in action at an event, please create a very short clip (2-3 minutes) proposing the session. We don’t care about the quality of the video; we care about the quality of the speakers. If your video isn’t already online, post it to a third-party site (YouTube is fine), and then share the link with us._

Redacted 🙃

# O'Reilly Author 
_If you are an author or content contributor at O’Reilly, please fill in the name of your main O’Reilly editorial contact._


# Did someone recommend or encourage you to submit a proposal?
If so, please let us know who sent you:

# Diversity * 
_Diversity is one of the factors we seriously consider when reviewing proposals as we seek to broaden our speaker roster._

_Does your presentation have the participation of a woman, person of color, person with disabilities, or member of another group often underrepresented at tech conferences?_

* **Yes**
* No

# Travel & other expense reimbursements * 
  _If your proposal is chosen, would you need assistance with hotel or travel related expenses (for example, because you are self-employed)? Please note: Your answer to this question will have no impact on the committee’s review of your proposal._
* Yes
* **No**
* Not sure at this time
