# Status
Rejected

# Title
UX Design and Education for Useful Internal Tools

# Abstract
The fastest way to become a 10X engineer is enabling 10 other engineers to do their jobs more effectively. Last year, our internal tools were unintuitive and filled with friction. We took steps to understand where people struggled and redesigned our tools. In this talk, I will explain how we approached UI design, made timeseries concepts more intuitive, and improved our training. By the end, you will understand the value of user experience for internal tools and become the 10X factor of your organization.

# Private Abstract
Here are some of the lessons I plan to cover (but there may be more):

Motivational and theoretical lessons:
- The biggest impact you can have as an internal tools engineer is by improving the UX of your tools and educating the rest of the engineers in your company. You can be a 10x engineer by making 10 other engineers work faster.
- Design your tools for laypeople - don't assume domain-specific knowledge. Imagine your hypothetical customer as someone who hasn't used any systems like yours yet (more common than you think) and check your assumptions about what people should know when using your tools.

Actionable lessons (Education):
- Know when it's time for education vs intuition: Sometimes it's important that a user understands distinctions about your domain (e.g., for metrics, don't use the average of percentiles), but most of the time it's not important (e.g., is their data coming from Graphite or OpenTSDB?).
- Clear, updated, and discoverable documentation is a part of the user experience of interacting with your team. In our case, we found it best to write a single page of all common questions with a table of contents so that users could cmd+F the topics they were interested in and skim. This was an improvement over our previous system of adding a new wiki page of instructions for every question.
- Make yourself open and accessible - if your team is intimidating or unfriendly to newcomers, people will struggle silently rather than asking you questions.

Actionable lessons (UX):
- Reduce friction by anticipating the most common use cases and pre-fill those as defaults in your tool
- Lessen anxiety by rewarding users for exploration. For example, if a user refreshes a page or clicks the back button, they shouldn't lose their progress; if they are looking at the configuration for something, they shouldn't be afraid of accidentally making an irreversible change.

# Talk History
I am giving this talk at TechSummit Berlin (in April) and Monitorama (in May). I have also submitted it to one other conference. There are no videos available yet.

# T-shirt
Female L

# Which book are you reading currently/have you recently read?
Reading currently: "A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy" and "UX Strategy"

In the past few months: "Grit", "The Charisma Myth", "The Secret Lives of Dresses"

Lately, I've been reading a lot of nonfiction in the "personal development" category and I'd like to mix in more fiction.

# When and how did you start programming?
In my freshman year of college, I was planning to study bioengineering and eventually do something related to medicine. I was told that computer science and programming were important to the future of medical research, so I took my school's introductory CS class out of curiosity. By the end of my freshman year, I was hooked and went on from there.

# What does programming mean for you?
Programming means creating something that you couldn't have done yourself. It means that your ideas have a way of being realized with minimal resources (relative to other fields, such as hardware or scientific research). It means finding a universe where you define the rules.

# Please tell us something surprising or amusing that you have learnt recently
I was talking to some friends who work on Blockly, the educational programming language. I learned that the Blockly team designs for older versions of Internet Explorer, does not use ES6, and tests on a multitude of old Android devices. They have a series of principles for their work because they want children with slow internet, old devices, and/or library computers to be able to learn programming. I was touched by their thoughtfulness and level of rigor.

